                                                                                   Page 1 of 9
                                                              Last updated April 8, 2026
                                                                  SCIENCE
                                                                   Grade 8

                                                      Three-Term Budget Of Work
                                                      For Learning Competencies

                                                                  First Term

                                       ●   Organ systems work together for the growth and survival of the organism.
                                       ●   Inherited traits passed from parents to offspring are governed by the rules on the
                                           patterns of inheritance.
                                       ●   Classification of living things shows life’s diversity.
   Content Standard                    ●   Photosynthesis and respiration are processes that show how living things
                                       ●   obtain energy and nutrients from the environment.
                                       ●   The use of timeline and charts can illustrate scientific knowledge of the structure of
                                           the atom has evolved over time.
                                       ●   The current structure of the atom includes subatomic particles, their symbol, mass,
                                           charge, and location.

                                   By the end of the Term, learners demonstrate the use of models, flow charts, and diagrams
                                   to illustrate how body systems work together for the growth and survival of an organism.
                                   They represent patterns of inheritance and predict simple ratios of offspring. They explain
                                   that the classification of living things shows the diversity and unity of living things. They
Performance Standard               describe the processes of respiration and photosynthesis and plan and record a scientific
                                   investigation to verify the raw materials needed. They use flow charts and diagrams to
                                   explain cycles in nature. They demonstrate an understanding of the structure of the atom
                                   and how our understandings have changed over time. They draw models of the atom and
                                   use tables to represent the properties of subatomic particles.

  Week                                                              Learning Competency

  1 to 2         Organ Systems Working Together



                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 9
                                                                                                                           Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science

                         ●   Using a labeled diagram, trace how food travels through the digestive tract and explain how
                             different digestive processes work, including mechanical processing, secretion, digestion,
                             absorption, and elimination.
                         ●   Use models, flow charts, diagrams, and simulations to explain how body systems work together,
                             such as digestion and excretion.
                         ●   Describe how plant organs (leaf, stem, roots) work together as the transport system.

                     Heredity
                         ●   Represent patterns of inheritance of a simple dominant/ recessive characteristic through
         3                   generations of a family.
                         ●   Predict simple ratios of offspring genotypes and phenotypes in crosses involving dominant/recessive
                             gene pairs.

                     Taxonomic Classification
      4 to 5             ●   Describe the importance of the six-kingdom system and the three-domain system of classification
                             of living things.
                         ●   Explain why humans are classified under Class Mammalia and the Order Primates.

                     Use of Timelines and Charts, Photosynthesis, Respiration and Cycles in Nature
                         ●   Using flow charts and labeled diagrams explain the role of plants and animals in the cycles of
                             nature, such as the carbon, oxygen, and water cycles.
      6 to 9             ●   Describe the process of photosynthesis and respiration, and identify its raw materials needed and
                             products.
                         ●   Using information from secondary sources identify the different parts of the cell where
                             photosynthesis and respiration occur.
                         ●   Plan a scientific investigation to verify the raw materials needed for photosynthesis.

                     Use of Timelines and Charts on the Atomic Model
        10               ●   Develop a timeline for the historical background of the development of the current Atomic Model
                             that identifies tiny particles as atoms.
                         ●   Draw the structure of an atom in terms of the nucleus and electron shells.



                                                                                                                                                Page 2 of 9
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 8 | Science

                     Subatomic Particles
        11               ●   Differentiate the subatomic particles protons, neutrons, and electrons in terms of their symbol,
                             mass, charge, and location within an atom.

                                           ●   Learners trace the movement of food through the digestive tract using a labeled
                                               diagram.
                                               They must:
     Suggested Activities                          ○   Label each organ (mouth to anus)
                                                   ○   Explain mechanical processing, secretion, digestion, absorption, elimination
                                           ●   Learners create a comparison table of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
                                               They must:
                                                   ○   Include symbol, charge, mass, and location

                                           ●   Conduct a scientific investigation to verify the raw materials needed for
  Suggested Performance                        photosynthesis.
               Tasks                       ●   Design an illustrated timeline or create a documentary that describes and discusses
                                               the development of the models of atomic structure contributed by Dalton, Thomson,
                                               Rutherford, and Bohr.





















                                                                                                                                                Page 3 of 9
                                                                                                                               Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science


                                                                    Second Term

                                           ●   Elements and compounds are identified as pure substances.
                                           ●   The periodic table is a useful tool to determine the chemical properties of elements.
       Content Standard                    ●   The distribution of continents and oceans on Earth is related to the presence of the
                                               oceanic crust and continental crust.
                                           ●   Volcanic terrain is built by the slow accumulation of erupted lava.
                                           ●   The earth’s surface is made of separate and movable plates.

                                       By the end of the Term, learners demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the
                                       periodic table by identifying the elements, their symbols, their valence electrons, and their
                                       positions within the groups and periods. They design and/or create timelines or
                                       documentaries as interesting learning tools. They demonstrate an appreciation of the
   Performance Standard                large-scale features of the ‘blue planet’ Earth and relate those features to the geological
                                       characteristics of the upper crustal layers of the Earth. They identify and describe the
                                       nature and impact of volcanic activity in building new crust and identify that these crust
                                       forming processes account for patterns and changes in the distribution of volcanoes,
                                       earthquakes, and mountain chains that have occurred over time.

      Week                                                               Learning Competency

                     Elements and Compounds
         1               ●   Describe the properties of pure substances as:
                                 a.  having fixed chemical composition, examples of which are elements and compounds
                                 b.  that all the atoms of an element have a unique number of protons

                     The Periodic Table
      2 to 5             ●   Discuss the significant contributions of early scientists in the development of the periodic table.
                         ●   Identify the names and symbols of the first 20 or several common elements of the periodic table.
                         ●   Explain that the arrangement of elements in the periodic table as 7 periods and 18 groups is based




                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 9
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science

                              on their atomic structure and chemical properties, such as reactivity.
                          ●   Explain that the electron structure of an atom determines its position on the periodic table.
                          ●   Calculate the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons in the atom of several elements, such as
                              aluminum.
                          ●   Explain that the elements within a group in the periodic table have the same number of valence
                              electrons.

         6           Distribution of the Continents
                          ●   Identify what proportion of the Earth's surface is covered with water as opposed to land.

                     Crustal Features and Interactions
                          ●   Gather information from secondary sources to name and describe the upper crustal layers of the
                              solid earth.
                          ●   Describe the different types of volcanoes found around the world according to their:
                                  a.  activity
     7 to 11                      b.  type of eruption
                                  c.  location in the crust
                          ●   Relate the shape of a volcano’s cone to its composition.
                          ●   Relate the location and distribution of active volcanoes, earthquake epicenters, and major mountain
                              belts to the distribution of oceanic crust and continental crust.
                          ●   Identify how oceanic crust and continental crust is associated with the Earth’s lithospheric plates.

                                            ●   Learners create a timeline showing the major scientists who contributed to the
                                                periodic table (Dobereiner, Newlands, Mendeleev, Moseley).
                                                They must:
                                                    ○   Summarize each scientist’s contribution
     Suggested Activities                   ●   Learners practice identifying the names and symbols of the first 20 elements using
                                                flash cards or memory puzzles.
                                                They must:
                                                    ○   Match element symbols to names
                                            ●   Learners plot active volcanoes, earthquake epicenters, and mountain ranges on a



                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                                                                                                                                 Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science

                                               world map to compare their distribution.
                                               They must:
                                                   ○   Explain patterns in relation to oceanic and continental crust

                                           ●   Create a volcano comparison chart showing:
  Suggested Performance                            ○   Activity (active, dormant, extinct)
               Tasks                               ○   Eruption type
                                                   ○   Crust location
                                                   ○   Cone shape, magma composition


































                                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 9
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science


                                                                      Third Term

                                           ●   Bodies of water and landforms affect typhoons.
                                           ●   The interaction between the Sun, Earth, and Moon causes tides.
                                           ●   Forces cause objects to accelerate.
                                           ●   An object is accelerating if the magnitude and/or direction of its velocity changes.
       Content Standard                    ●   Kinetic energy is the energy of movement, and potential energy is stored energy.
                                           ●   As an object falls from a height its energy is conserved because its potential energy
                                               is transformed to kinetic energy.
                                           ●   The resources of the Philippines provide many benefits to its people and their
                                               activities.

                                       By the end of the Term, learners draw on their understanding of the relationships between
                                       landforms and oceans to explain the formation and impacts of typhoons. They also identify
                                       that predictable interactions of the Sun-Earth-Moon system result in tidal effects. They
                                       demonstrate understanding of the technical meaning of acceleration and apply their
                                       understanding to everyday situations involving motion. They represent and interpret
   Performance Standard                acceleration in distance-time and velocity-time graphs to make predictions about the
                                       movement of objects. Learners link motion to kinetic energy and potential energy and
                                       explain transformations between them using everyday examples. Learners relate
                                       understanding of kinetic energy and potential energy to an appreciation of the
                                       hydro-electric resources of the Philippines for the generation of electricity for use in homes,
                                       communities,

      Week                                                               Learning Competency

                     Typhoons
      1 to 2             ●   Gather information from secondary sources to explain:
                                 a.  how typhoons develop
                                 b.  why the Philippines is prone to typhoons



                                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 9
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science

                         ●   Use a map and a record of tracking data to trace the path of typhoons that enter the Philippine Area
                             of Responsibility (PAR).
                         ●   Discuss how bodies of water and landforms affect typhoons.
                         ●   Father information from the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) and other reliable
                             websites to identify how authorities support communities affected by typhoons.

                     Tides
         3               ●   Relate the relative movements of the Earth, Moon, and Sun with the occurrence of tides.
                         ●   Draw on information from secondary sources to identify situations where tidal differences could be
                             exploited to generate renewable energy.

                     Acceleration and Distance-time and Velocity-time Graphs
                         ●   Identify that forces cause objects to accelerate, and that acceleration of an object is its rate of
                             change of velocity.
      4 to 5             ●   Observe and describe examples of accelerating objects at school and in the local community,
                             including objects that show uniform circular motion.
                         ●   Construct and annotate distance-time graphs and velocity-time graphs to represent uniform and
                             non-uniform acceleration.

                     Kinetic Energy and Potential Energy
                         ●   Describe kinetic energy as the movement of objects or particles, and potential energy as energy
      6 to 7                 stored due to the position of objects or particles.
                         ●   Identify examples of everyday situations that demonstrate:
                                 a.  kinetic energy being transformed to potential energy
                                 a.  potential energy being transformed to kinetic energy

                     Work and Energy
                         ●   Recognize that work is done when a force causes the displacement of an object.
      8 to 9             ●   Recognize that power is the rate of doing work.
                         ●   Explain that the mechanical energy of an object is the sum of the kinetic energy and the potential
                             energy available to do work.



                                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 9
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 8 | Science

                     Renewable Energy
                         ●   Describe conservation of energy in everyday situations involving gravity, such as when objects fall.
        10               ●   Gather information from secondary sources to explain how potential energy stored in lakes and
                             dams in the Philippines is used to produce kinetic energy to generate electricity for use in homes,
                             communities, and industry.

                     Properties of Light
        11               ●   Carry out guided investigations to describe and illustrate the reflection of light using plane and
                             curved mirrors and the refraction of light using transparent blocks, lenses, and prisms with
                             examples from everyday applications.

                                           ●   Learners use a map and historical tracking data to trace the path of 3 typhoons that
                                               entered the PAR.
                                               They must:
                                                   ○   Plot coordinates
                                                   ○   Label direction and intensity changes
                                           ●   Learners compare two typhoon paths—one passing over water, one over land—and
     Suggested Activities                      describe how landforms and water bodies affected their strength.
                                               They must:
                                                   ○   Identify weakening/strengthening points
                                           ●   Learners research real-world examples of tidal energy plants and explain how tidal
                                               differences are used to generate electricity.
                                               They must:
                                                   ○   Identify locations and mechanisms

                                           ●   Design and construct a model house to withstand a simulation of wind speed in a
  Suggested Performance                        typhoon, test the model, and redesign if needed.
               Tasks                       ●   Make a working model of a party light that uses batteries as the power source.
                                               Describe the scientific ideas that you have utilized to change the properties of light.





                                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 9
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026