                                                                                    Page 1 of 11
                                                               Last updated April 8, 2026
                                                                  SCIENCE
                                                                   Grade 6

                                                      Three-Term Budget Of Work
                                                       For Learning Competencies

                                                                  First Term

                                       ●   Diagrams and flowcharts demonstrate processes involving heat energy and changes
                                           of state.
                                       ●   Changes in materials can be either reversible or irreversible.
                                       ●   Mixtures and the products of their separation techniques are very useful in our daily
                                           lives.
                                       ●   Scientific investigations need to satisfy the features of a fair test and use accurate
   Content Standard                        and reliable measurements.
                                       ●   Animals have systems that help them grow, respond, and reproduce.
                                       ●   There are several modes of reproduction in plants.
                                       ●   To be valid and reliable, scientific investigations need to include fair tests and
                                           multiple trials.
                                       ●   Animals can be grouped as vertebrates or invertebrates based on their
                                           characteristics.

                                   By the end of the term, learners demonstrate an understanding of the benefits of various
                                   separation techniques. They use diagrams and flowcharts to describe changes of state.
                                   They use the words reversible and irreversible to describe changes to materials. They
Performance Standard               demonstrate skills in the use of equipment. They recognize and apply their understanding
                                   of the features of a fair test.  They demonstrate an understanding of the different ways that
                                   plants reproduce. Plan a simple scientific investigation to determine which method works
                                   best in a given habitat. They describe and provide examples of vertebrates as animals with
                                   a backbone and invertebrates as animals that do not have a backbone.

  Week                                                              Learning Competency



                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 11
                                                                                                                           Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 6 | Science

                     Diagrams and Flowcharts, Processes of Changes of State
      1 to 2             ●   Describe changes of state for solids, liquids, and gases as melting, evaporation, freezing,
                             condensation using diagrams and flowcharts.
                         ●   Explain the role of heat energy in change of state processes.

         3           Physical and Chemical Change
                         ●   Explain why physical changes are reversible, and chemical changes are irreversible.

                     Mixtures and Separation Techniques
                         ●   Describe useful everyday examples of uniform and non-uniform mixtures, such as solutions and
                             suspensions.
      4 to 6             ●   Describe air as a mixture of oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and water vapor.
                         ●   Demonstrate various techniques in separating mixtures, such as decantation, winnowing, scooping,
                             picking, evaporation, filtering, sieving, and using magnets.
                         ●   Explain the benefits of each mixture separation technique in preparing useful products.

                     Fair Test
                         ●   Apply the features of a fair test: a. change one factor, b. measure one factor, and c. keep all other
      7 to 8                 factors the same.
                         ●   Recognize the features of a fair test and that scientific investigations also involve a) doing at least
                             three trials, or use replication, and b) observing, measuring, and recording accurately.

                     The Circulatory System
         9               ●   Identify from pictures and diagrams the parts of the circulatory system as heart, blood, and blood
                             vessels, and describe how they work.

                     Reproduction in Plants
                         ●   Describe the different ways that plants reproduce, such as pollination, seed production, and plant
        10                   propagation.
                         ●   Plan a simple scientific investigation that includes the features of a fair test, replication, and
                             accurate measurement to determine which type of plant propagation, such as cutting, budding,




                                                                                                                                                Page 2 of 10
                                                                                                                                Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 6 | Science

                             layering, grafting, works best for garden plants.

                     Vertebrates and Invertebrates
        11               ●   Describe the differences between animals with a backbone (vertebrates) and animals without
                             backbones (invertebrates) by using common local examples of each group.

                                          ●   Change of State Flowchart Task – Learners complete and interpret
                                              diagrams/flowcharts showing melting, freezing, evaporation, and condensation.
                                          ●   Heat Energy Cause-and-Effect Investigation – Learners observe how adding or
                                              removing heat changes state and record evidence linking heat energy to the process.
                                          ●   Physical vs Chemical Change Sorting Lab – Learners classify examples as
                                              reversible physical changes or irreversible chemical changes and justify their answers
                                              using observable evidence.
                                          ●   Mixture Type Identification Activity – Learners examine everyday mixtures and
     Suggested Activities                     classify them as uniform (solutions) or non-uniform (suspensions) using a table of
                                              observations.
                                          ●   Air as a Mixture Concept Map – Learners build a simple concept map showing air
                                              components (oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, water vapor) and their importance.
                                          ●   Mixture Separation Stations – Learners rotate through stations demonstrating
                                              decantation, sieving, filtering, evaporation, magnets, and hand-picking, then record
                                              results.
                                          ●   Fair Test Planning and Replication Checklist – Learners design a simple
                                              investigation plan using one changed factor, one measured factor, controlled
                                              variables, and at least three trials with accurate recording.

                                          ●   Apply an appropriate separation technique to solve a local or household problem.
                                          ●   Plan and conduct a simple scientific investigation involving a physical change, such as
  Suggested Performance                       “Does sugar dissolve faster in hot or cold water?” Use your understanding of a fair
               Tasks                          test to answer the question.
                                          ●   Design and present a “Plant Reproduction Guide” demonstrating pollination, seed
                                              production, and propagation using drawings, models, or simple classroom examples.



                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 10
                                                                                                                             Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 6 | Science


                                                                   Second Term

                                           ●   Producers, consumers, scavengers, and decomposers have important roles in food
                                               webs.
       Content Standard                    ●   Interactions within an ecosystem can have important impacts on the living things
                                               within it.
                                           ●   Simple machines allow people to change the direction and size of forces.
                                           ●   Science processes and concepts help solve everyday problems.

                                       By the end of the term, learners design an example of a food web showing the role of
                                       consumers, producers, scavengers, and decomposers. They identify the technical terms
                                       biotic and abiotic as referring to living and non-living things. They investigate and explain
   Performance Standard                how simple machines (inclined planes, wedges, levers, and pulleys) help people do work by
                                       changing the magnitude and direction of forces, using fair tests and evidence from guided
                                       activities and real-life examples. They also demonstrate understanding of waves by
                                       describing how waves carry energy, investigating water waves and their features and
                                       behaviors.

      Week                                                             Learning Competency

         1           Food Webs
                         ●   Describe the roles of producers, consumers, scavengers, and decomposers in a food web.

                     Processes of Interactions between Living Things
         2               ●   Use information from secondary sources to describe that living things interact with each other in
                             the natural environment, such as through competition, or predation.

                     Biotic and Abiotic Factors in an Ecosystem
      3 to 4             ●   Describe living things, such as animals and plants, as biotic factors and light, water, temperature,
                             and soil type, as abiotic factors of an ecosystem.




                                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 10
                                                                                                                              Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 6 | Science

                         ●   Explain how interaction between living things and interactions between living and non-living things
                             may bring good or harm to the living things involved.

                     Simple Machines
                         ●   Observe and describe examples and uses of simple machines found at home, at school, and in the
                             community.
      5 to 7             ●   Demonstrate through guided investigation the advantages and limitations of simple machines such
                             as inclined planes, wedges, levers, and pulleys.
                         ●   Carry out fair tests to show how levers can be used to change the magnitude and direction of a
                             force.

                     Properties of Water and Sound Waves
                         ●   Identify that waves carry energy from a source to a receiver.
                         ●   Carry out investigations with water waves in a ripple tank, a big tub of water or improvised ripple
                             tank and observe and describe the features of the waves including their:
     8 to 10                     a.  shape, such as crests and troughs
                                 b.  size, such as width and height
                                 c.  patterns of movement, such as how they bend, or reflect off walls
                         ●   Research using secondary sources to identify how the properties of waves are described using
                             scientific terms such as amplitude, frequency, wavelength, and velocity.

                                           ●   Food Web Role Card Sort – Learners classify organisms as producers, consumers,
                                               scavengers, or decomposers and explain each role in a food web.
                                           ●   Interaction Scenario Analysis – Learners read short ecosystem scenarios and
                                               identify interactions such as competition and predation, including effects on survival.
     Suggested Activities                  ●   Biotic–Abiotic Factor Mapping – Learners complete an ecosystem map labeling
                                               biotic factors and abiotic factors (light, water, temperature, soil type).
                                           ●   Good or Harm Interaction T-Chart – Learners organize examples of living–living
                                               and living–nonliving interactions into “helpful” or “harmful” with brief explanations.
                                           ●   Simple Machines Community Inventory – Learners identify and document simple
                                               machines at home/school/community and describe their uses.



                                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 10
                                                                                                                              Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 6 | Science

                                           ●   Simple Machine Advantage-Limitation Stations – Learners rotate through
                                               stations (inclined plane, wedge, lever, pulley) and record how each makes work
                                               easier and its limitations.
                                           ●   Ripple Tank Wave Investigation and Wave-Type Comparison – Learners
                                               investigate water waves (crests/troughs, height/width, reflection/bending), then use
                                               research to define amplitude/frequency/wavelength/velocity and compare
                                               longitudinal vs transverse waves with examples.

                                           ●   Apply the features of a fair test to investigate how much water is needed to grow a
                                               common garden plant from a seed.
                                           ●   Select an appropriate medium to design an example of a food web in a local
                                               ecosystem.
                                           ●   Conduct a community simple machine photo survey and create a labeled poster
                                               explaining each machine’s use, advantage, and limitation.
                                           ●   Build and investigate an improvised ripple tank to observe wave features and
                                               behaviors, then produce a concept map comparing transverse and longitudinal waves
                                               using key terms (amplitude, frequency, wavelength, velocity).
                                           ●   Develop an information poster that aims at showing learners who are interested in
  Suggested Performance                        music-related subjects to consider the benefits of studying science. The poster should
               Tasks                           use words, pictures or drawings and labelled diagrams to explain how musical
                                               instruments utilize the properties of sound waves. The poster may suggest ways that
                                               learners could use scientific processes to develop their musical techniques.
                                           ●   Design and propose or improve the design of a simple machine that can be used at
                                               home, in school, or in the community. Include the following details:
                                                   1.  Name and purpose of the simple machine
                                                   2.  Description of how the simple machine works and its intended function
                                                   3.  Materials needed for constructing the simple machine
                                                   4.  Sketch or diagram illustrating the design and functionality of the proposed
                                                       simple machine
                                                   5.  Explain how the proposed simple machine can be useful in the chosen setting
                                                       (home, school, or community) and its potential benefits.



                                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 10
                                                                                                                              Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                  Grade 6 | Science

                                              ●   Utilize the concept of motion and gravity to write a creative story, poem, or any
                                                  written art.













































                                                                                                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                                                                                                                                        Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 6 | Science


                                                                     Third Term

                                           ●   Waves transfer energy between source and receiver.
                                           ●   Volcanoes are vents from which molten rock from Earth’s crust erupts onto the
                                               surface releasing pressure and gases.
                                           ●   The Philippine volcanoes can violently and unpredictably erupt lava, ash, and ballistic
       Content Standard                        projectiles.
                                           ●   Weather and climate have predictable patterns throughout the year, which affect
                                               human activities.
                                           ●   The revolution and the rotation of the Earth demonstrate observable patterns.
                                           ●   Constellations are patterns of stars in the sky.

                                       By the end of the term, learners demonstrate comparing and identifying examples of
                                       longitudinal and transverse waves. Learners appreciate that volcanoes can have unexpected
                                       and severe impacts on communities and that the uncertainty and impacts of unpredicted
                                       eruptions can be offset by understanding and following alerts from authorities. Learners
                                       appreciate weather patterns that produce seasons that are largely predictable, and they use
   Performance Standard                models to scientifically understand and describe natural processes and timing that can be
                                       relied upon, such as the changes of season. Learners identify that scientific models are
                                       valuable in explaining other observations of patterns in nature, such as the apparent
                                       movement of celestial objects across the sky. They exhibit respect for cultures and
                                       interpretations of natural phenomena by indigenous people over generations and balance
                                       that with respect for explaining phenomena using scientific inquiry and objectivity.

      Week                                                              Learning Competency

                     Longitudinal and Transverse Waves
      1 to 2             ●   Demonstrate using simple models how longitudinal waves and transverse waves carry energy.
                         ●   Describe and explain how sound changes when the source or the receiver are moving.





                                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 10
                                                                                                                               Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work                Grade 6 | Science

                     Volcanic Activity and Safety
                         ●    Explain what volcanoes are and how they are formed.
                         ●    Use local information or other reliable sources to identify where the nearest active and inactive
                              volcanoes are located and assess the risk of impacts from eruptions to their local community.
      3 to 8             ●    Discuss the patterns of volcanic eruptions in the Philippines over the last 100 years with family and
                              community members to assess and describe how predictable patterns of eruptions are.
                         ●    Identify and describe some of the materials formed during volcanic eruptions in the Philippines.
                         ●    Interpret PHIVOLCS Volcano Monitoring (Alert Levels) to demonstrate what to do before, during,
                              and after a volcanic eruption.

                     Seasons in the Philippines
         9               ●    Describe the different seasons in the Philippines and suggest activities that are appropriate for each
                              season.

                     Motions of the Earth
                         ●    Demonstrate the rotation of the Earth on its axis using a globe to explain day and night.
                         ●    Make a Sun-Earth-Moon system model to demonstrate and explain the observable effects of
        10                    predictable patterns and events including:
                                  a.  changes in seasons
                                  b.  changes observed in the patterns of visible star over a year
                                  c.  solar and lunar eclipses

                     Constellations
                         ●    Explain why ancient human cultures relied on constellations to indicate directions and verify
                              seasons.
        11               ●    Gather information from local indigenous community members or from reliable secondary sources
                              to investigate ways that indigenous people of the Philippines represented and communicated
                              understandings of:
                                  a.  the predictability of solar and lunar eclipses
                                  b.  patterns /interpretations in the night sky and their use for tracking time





                                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 10
                                                                                                                                 Last updated April 8, 2026
 Budget of Work               Grade 6 | Science

                                          ●   Wave Model Demonstration – Learners use a rope/slinky to model transverse and
                                              longitudinal waves and explain how energy is transferred.
                                          ●   Moving Sound Source Simulation – Learners simulate the Doppler effect (moving
                                              buzzer/phone sound) and describe how sound changes when the source or receiver
                                              moves.
                                          ●   Volcano Formation Concept Sketch – Learners create a labeled diagram
                                              explaining what volcanoes are and how they form (magma, vents, eruption).
                                          ●   Local Volcano Risk Mapping – Learners use maps and reliable sources to locate
     Suggested Activities                     nearby active/inactive volcanoes and identify possible community risks.
                                          ●   Eruption Pattern Timeline Interview – Learners gather information from
                                              family/community and secondary sources to create a 100-year eruption timeline and
                                              discuss predictability.
                                          ●   PHIVOLCS Alert Level Action Plan – Learners interpret PHIVOLCS alert levels and
                                              complete a before–during–after preparedness plan for a volcano eruption.
                                          ●   Sun–Earth–Moon and Indigenous Sky Knowledge Inquiry – Learners build a
                                              Sun–Earth–Moon model to explain seasons, star patterns, and eclipses, then
                                              document Indigenous interpretations of the night sky and eclipse predictability using
                                              interviews or reliable sources.

                                          ●   Design and describe an evacuation plan for a house or school in the event of a
                                              nearby and intensifying volcanic eruption. Indicate planned actions to reach a safe
                                              place and outline the reasoning behind the planned actions.
  Suggested Performance                   ●   Select a constellation that can be seen from the Philippines and describe its features.
               Tasks                          Explain its practical and cultural significance for Filipino people in the past and
                                              present.
                                          ●   Construct a Sun–Earth–Moon system model to show seasons, changing star patterns,
                                              and eclipses, and include a brief report explaining how ancient cultures used
                                              constellations for direction and seasonal tracking.






                                                                                                                                           Page 10 of 10
                                                                                                                             Last updated April 8, 2026