            Republic of the Philippines
            Department of Education
         DepEd Complex, Meralco Avenue
                    Pasig City




Standards and Competencies
 for Five-Year-Old Filipino
          Children
                   May 2016
                                                                K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM




I.      INTRODUCTION



                          “The first years of life are important because what happens in early childhood can matter in a lifetime.”
                                                                                                                 (Harvard, 2009)



                Republic Act 10157, or "The Kindergarten Education Act" made Kindergarten the compulsory and mandatory entry stage to basic education. Section 2 of
        this Act provides that all five (5)-year old children shall be given equal opportunities for Kindergarten Education to effectively promote their physical, social,
        emotional, and intellectual development, including values formation, so they will be ready for school. The Department of Education (DepEd) believes that
        Kindergarten is the transition period from informal to formal literacy (Grades 1–12), considering that age five (5) is within the critical years in which positive
        experiences must be nurtured to ascertain school readiness. Extensive research has shown that this is the period of greatest growth and development,
        during which the brain continuously develops most rapidly and almost at its fullest. It is also the stage when self-esteem, vision of the world, moral
        foundations are established, and their mind’s absorptive capacity for learning is at its sharpest. Teachers/parents/caregivers/adults should therefore be
        guided to facilitate explorations of our young learners in an engaging, creative, and child-centered curriculum that is developmentally appropriate and which
        immerses them in meaningful experiences. Provision of varied play-based activities leads them to becoming emergent literates and helps them to naturally
        acquire the competencies to develop holistically. They are able to understand the world by exploring their environment, as they are encouraged to create and
        discover, which eventually leads them to becoming willing risk takers and ready to tackle formal school work.

                Section 5 of said Republic Act also state the adoption of the Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education (MTB-MLE). Therefore, the mother
        tongue of the learner shall be the primary medium of instruction for teaching and learning in kindergarten.




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                                 Page 2 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
II.   FRAMEWORK

                                                                                The Kindergarten Curriculum Framework (KCF) draws from the goals
                                                                         of the K to 12 Philippine Basic Education Curriculum Framework and adopts
                                                                         the general principles of the National Early Learning Framework (NELF).
                                                                         Kindergarten learners need to have a smooth transition to the content-
                                                                         based curriculum of Grades 1 to 12.

                                                                                The items in rectangles in Figure 1 show the theoretical bases for
                                                                         teaching-learning in the early years, which are founded on constructivism,
                                                                         integrative,   thematic,   collaborative,   inquiry–based, and reflective teaching
                                                                         in play-based approaches with application of the Developmentally Appropriate
                                                                         Practices (DAP); these support the principles of child growth and
                                                                         development, and the learning program development and assessment.

                                                                                The circles, on the other hand, signify the system of how Kindergarten
                                                                         Education is to be employed. The interlocked ellipses represent the learning
                                                                         domains that have to be nurtured and equally imparted to holistically develop
                                                                         children. It also forms a flower that portrays the gradual unfolding but steady
                                                                         development, as is expected of every child. The child is seen as being in the
                                                                         process of blossoming – like a flower bud whose development should not be
                                                                         forced lest it lose its chance to fully mature. The domains are enclosed by
                                                                         the Learning Areas children will meet in Grade One onward, for which they are
                                                                         being prepared. The outermost layer indicates the Curricular Themes upon
                                                                         which the Kindergarten Curriculum Guide (KCG) or the Teacher’s Guide is
                                                                         designed. It has been crafted using the thematic or integrative approach to
                Figure I. The Kindergarten Curriculum Framework
                                                                         curriculum development in a spiralling learning process. This approach
                                                                         employs integerative and interactive teaching-learning strategies as well as
                                                                         child-centered learning experiences.


K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                   Page 3 of 32
                                                                  K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
III.      GENERAL GUIDING PRINCIPLES

The following are the general guiding principles of the National Early Learning Framework (NELF):

       A. On Child Growth and Development
         1. Every child is unique. Growth and development vary from child to child, for whom the first eight years of life are most vital. He/she has an innate desire to learn,
            and this is best done through meaningful and real experiences.

         2. Every aspect of growth and development is interrelated and interdependent. The child needs to be nurtured in a good and caring environment that enhances
             healthy and dependable relationships with other children and most significant adults.

         3. The learning and development of every child involve a series of complex and dynamic processes that are best attended to in a more positive and responsive
            manner.

         4. The child must be encouraged to aspire beyond one’s own level of achievements and to practice newly acquired competencies.

         5. Every child is a thinking, moving, feeling, and interactive human being able to actively participate in the learning and development of self in the context of one’s
             family and community, including cultural and religious beliefs.

       B. On Learning Program Development
        1. The learning program is child centered. It promotes the holistic way by which young children grow and develop,
           and recognizes the role of families and communities in supporting the child through various stages of growth and development.

        2. The learning program is appropriate for developing the domains, and must sustain interest in active learning of all young children including those with special
           abilities, marginalized, and/or those at risk.

        3. The learning program is implemented by way of diverse learning activities that may be enhanced with multimedia technologies such as interactive radio,
           audio/video clips, and computer-enhanced activities.

        4. The use of learning materials and other resources that are locally developed and/or locally available is encouraged. The mother tongue shall be used as the child’s
           language of learning.

        C. On Learning Assessment
        1. Assessment is done to monitor learning, know where the child is at, and inform parents of the child’s progress.

        2. Assessment is crucial to identifying the child’s total developmental needs and does not determine academic achievement.

        3. Assessment is best conducted on a regular basis so that a timely response or intervention can be made to improve learning.

        4. The results of the learning assessment of a child shall be kept strictly confidential. Ratings should be more qualitative/descriptive and less numerical.

        5. The family and community must be informed of the general outcomes of learning so as to encourage further cooperation and partnerships.


K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 32
                                                                 K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM

IV.     DEVELOPMENTAL DOMAINS ( and what to expect in each)

                   “Developmental domains” refers to specific aspects of growth and changes in children.            These are represented by the ellipses to show
        interconnectedness in the holistic development of children. The contents of each developmental domain are defined by learning expectations, as follows:


               1.     Socio-Emotional Development (Pagpapaunlad ng Sosyo-Emosyunal at Kakayahang Makipamuhay) - Children are expected to
                      develop emotional skills, basic concepts pertaining to her/himself, how to relate well with other people in his/her immediate environment,
                      demonstrate awareness of one's social identity, and appreciate cultural diversity among the school, community, and other people.

               2.     Values Development (Kagandahang Asal) - Children are expected to show positive attitudes, self-concept, respect, concern for self
                      and others, behave appropriately in various situations and places, manifest love of God, country, and fellowmen.

               3.     Physical Health & Motor Development (Kalusugang Pisikal at Pagpapaunlad sa Kakayahang Motor) - Children are expected
                      to develop both their fine and gross motor skills to be efficient and effective movers when engaging in wholesome physical and health
                      activities. They are also expected to acquire an understanding of good health habits and develop their awareness about the importance of
                      safety and how they can prevent danger at home, in school, and in public places.

               4.     Aesthetic/Creative Development (Sining) – Children are expected to develop their aesthetic sense and creative expression through
                      drawing, painting, and manipulative activities. Aesthetic development involves the love and pursuit of beauty in art, music, and movement,
                      and creates opportunities for the creative expression of emotions, thoughts, feelings, and ideas.

               5.     Mathematics - Children are expected to understand and demonstrate knowledge, thinking skills, and insights into patterns of
                      mathematics, concepts of numbers, length, capacity, mass, and time through the use of concrete objects or materials, and to apply these
                      meaningfully in their daily experiences. Children are provided with varied manipulative activities to help them see relationships and
                      interconnections in math and enable them to deal flexibly with mathematical ideas and concepts.

              6.      Understanding of the Physical and Natural Environment - Children are expected to demonstrate a basic understanding of concepts
                    pertaining to living and nonliving things, including weather, and use these in categorizing things in his/her environment. They are also
                    expected to acquire the essential skills and sustain their natural curiosity in their immediate environment through exploration, discovery,
                    observation, and relate their everyday experiences using their senses (touch, sight, smell, taste, and hearing).

              7. Language, Literacy, and Communication - This domain provides opportunities on early literacy learning for self-expression through
                 language using the mother tongue or the child’s first language. Children are expected to develop communicative skills in their first language.
                 They are also expected to develop more positive attitudes toward reading, writing, and to view themselves as effective users and learners of
                 language.



K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                                Page 5 of 32
                                                                 K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
V.      CURRICULAR THEMES

                  The outer circle of the KCF corresponds to the interrelatedness of the learning domains, which dictates the way to approach implementation. The
        daily activities prescribed in the Kindergarten Curriculum Guide (KCG) or the Teacher’s Guide is designed as learner centered, inclusive, and developmentally
        appropriate to employ an integrative and interactive approach in developing the competencies focusing on the themes shown in Figure 2. The child and brain
        development principles were the bases of the selection of content, concepts, and skills, as well as the learning activities. Developmentally appropriate
        practices considered the developmental tasks that five-year-olds, in general, could tackle at a specific time, and in a specific sequence. Thus, these curricular
        themes adhere to Bronfenbrenner’s Bio-ecological theory that defines “layers of environment, each having an effect on a child’s holistic development.”
           1. Myself - concepts and ideas that help the learners understand himself/ herself better so
               that he/she will develop as an individual

           2. My Family - concepts, ideas, practices that guide the child to be responsible and proud of himself
               and his family

           3. My School - concepts, ideas, practices, and situations that help the child understand how to
              be an individual and socialize with other learners, teachers, and other school personnel
                                                                                                                                   Figure 2. The Curricular Themes
           4. My Community- concepts, ideas, practices, situations, and responsibilities that the learner
               should acquire and understand so that he/she will a become functional and responsive
               member of the community

           5. More Things Around Me - all other concepts, ideas, practices, situations, and responsibilities
               beyond themes 1 to 4, but which may be relevant to the community, culture, and interest of
               the learner




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 32
                                                                      K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM


                                                                 TRANSITION FROM KINDERGARTEN TO GRADE 1
VI.     TRANSITION PARADIGM

                                                                                       KINDERGARTEN                                            GRADE 1


                                                              DOMAINS
                                                                                                                    LEARNING AREAS
   Figure 3 illustrates the
                                                 Socio-Emotional Development
   interrelatedness of the                        (Sosyo-Emosyunal at Kakayahang                                                            Araling Panlipunan
                                                                                                       Social Studies
                                                          Makipamuhay)
   developmental domains and the
   learning areas. The domain-based
                                                     Values Development
   skills intended to be developed in                   (Kagandahang Asal)                            Values Education                  Edukasyon sa Pagpapakatao

   kindergarten are aligned to the
                                                  Physical Health and Motor
   learning area, content-based
                                                        Development
                                                                                                Pysical Education & Health
   curriculum to be learned in Grade 1.                (Kalusugang Pisikal at
                                                        Kasanayang Motor)                                                                  Music, Arts, Physical
   Domains are strategically integrated
                                                                                                                                           Education and Health
   in the content of the blocks of time
                                                    Aesthetic Development                              Music and Arts
   as contained in the KCG/Teaching                            (Sining)

   Guide. Activities tackle different but
                                                          Mathematics                                  Mathematics                             Mathematics
   interrelated domains for the smooth
   and successful transition of every
                                                     Physical and Natural
   five-year-old Filipino child from                    Environment                                       Science
                                                   (Pisikal at Likas na Kapaligiran)
   Kindergarten on to Grades 1 to 12
   Basic Education.
                                                    Language, Literacy and                               Language                       Filipino and Mother Tongue
                                                       Communication


                                                                                                                        Figure 3. Transition Paradigm

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                            Page 7 of 32
                                                                K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM


VII.    MATRIX OF LEARNING STANDARDS AND COMPETENCIES

A. PAGPAPAUNLAD SA KAKAYAHANG SOSYO-EMOSYUNAL (SE)

                                              PAMANTAYAN
                                     NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                                     LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                                        PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                       CODE
                               Ang bata ay nagkakaroon      Ang bata ay                                                                               MATERIALS
                               ng pag-unawa sa…             nakapagpapamalas ng...
                                                                                        1. Nakikilala ang sarili                    SEKPSE-00-1
Pagkilala ng Sarili at         sariling ugali at damdamin   kakayahang kontrolin ang       1.1 pangalan at apelyido                SEKPSE-Ia-1.1
Pagpapahayag ng                                             sariling damdamin at pag-      1.2 kasarian                            SEKPSE-Ib-1.2
Sariling Emosyon (PSE)                                      uugali, gumawa ng              1.3 gulang/kapanganakan                 SEKPSE-Ic-1.3
                                                            desisyon at magtagumpay        1.4 gusto/di-gusto                      SEKPSE-IIc-1.4
                                                            sa kanyang mga gawain
                                                                                        2. Naisakikilos ang sariling kakayahan
                                                                                           sa iba’t ibang paraan, hal. pag-awit,    SEKPSE-If-2
                                                                                           pagsayaw, at iba pa

                                                                                        3. Nasasabi ang mga sariling
                                                                                           pangangailangan nang walang pag-         SEKPSE-If-3
                                                                                           aalinlangan
                                                                                        4. Naipakikita ang tiwala sa sarili na
                                                                                           tugunan ang sariling
                                                                                           pangangailangan nang mag-isa
                                                                                                                                   SEKPSE-Ie-5
                                                                                           Hal. maghugas ng kamay, kumain,
                                                                                           magbihis, magligpit, tapusin ang
                                                                                           gawaing nasimulan
                                                                                        5. Naipakikita ang kahandaan na
                                                                                                                                   SEKPSE-IIIc-6
                                                                                           sumubok ng bagong karanasan
                                                                                        6. Natutukoy ang kahalagahan ng
                                                                                           pagpapakita ng positibong pag-uugali
                                                                                                                                   SEKPSE-00-8
                                                                                           sa harap ng hindi inaasahang
                                                                                           pangyayari tulad ng pagkatalo sa
                                                                                           laro, atbp.
                                                                                        7. Naipakikita ang pag-unawa sa
                                                                                           nangyayari o kasalukuyang sitwasyon
                                                                                           at nakapaghihintay sa tamang oras       SEKPSE-00-10
                                                                                           na matugunan ang
                                                                                           gusto/pangangailangan
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                      Page 8 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                              PAMANTAYAN
                                     NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                                 LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                             PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                               CODE
                               Ang bata ay nagkakaroon      Ang bata ay                                                                           MATERIALS
                               ng pag-unawa sa…             nakapagpapamalas ng...
                                                                                        8. Nakikilala ang mga pangunahing
                                                                                           emosyon (tuwa, takot, galit, at       SEKPSE-00-11
                                                                                           lungkot)
                                                            kakayahang unawain at       1. Naipahihiwatig ang katanggap-
Pag-unawa sa Emosyon           damdamin at emosyon ng       tanggapin ang emosyon at       tanggap na reaksiyon sa mga
                                                                                                                                  SEKEI-00-1
ng Iba (EI)                    iba                          damdamin ng iba                akmang sitwasyon (hindi pagtawa sa
                                                                                           nasaktan na batang nadapa)
                                                                                        2. Nagkakaroon ng kamalayan sa
                                                                                                                                  SEKEI-00-2
                                                                                           damdamin ng iba
                                                                                           Nakikilala at iginagalang ang
Pagpapahalaga sa               pagkakaiba at pagkilala ng   pagkilala sa                   pagkakaiba-iba ng tao: wika,
Pagkakaiba (PP)                tao                          pagkakapareho at               kasarian, kaanyuan, kulay, kultura
                                                                                                                                  SEKPP-Ib-1
                                                            pagkakaiba ng tao              (kasuotan, gawi, paniniwala),
                                                                                           katayuan sa buhay, kakayahan

Pakikisalamuha sa Iba          konsepto ng pamilya,         pagmamalaki at              1. Natutukoy na may pamilya ang
                                                                                                                                 KMKPPam-00-1
Bilang Kasapi ng               paaralan at                  kasiyahang                     bawat isa
Pamilya (PPam)                 komunidad bilang kasapi      makapagkuwento ng           2. Natutukoy kung sino-sino ang
                                                                                                                                 KMKPPam-00-2
                               nito                         sariling karanasan bilang      bumubuo ng pamilya
                                                            kabahagi ng pamilya,        3. Nailalarawan kung paano nagkakaiba
                                                                                                                                 KMKPPam-00-3
                                                            paaralan at komunidad          at nagkakatulad ang bawat pamilya
                                                                                        4. Naipakikita ang pagmamahal sa mga
                                                                                           kasapi ng pamilya at sa nakatatanda
                                                                                           sa pamamagitan ng:
                                                                                           4.1 pagsunod nang maayos sa mga
                                                                                                utos/kahilingan
                                                                                           4.2 pagmamano/paghalik
                                                                                           4.3 paggamit ng magagalang na
                                                                                                pagbati/pananalita               KMKPPam-00-5
                                                                                           4.4 pagsasabi ng mga salitang may
                                                                                                pagmamahal (I love you
                                                                                                Papa/Mama)
                                                                                           4.5 pagsasabi ng “Hindi ko po
                                                                                                sinasadya “, ”Salamat po”,
                                                                                                “Walang anuman”, kung
                                                                                                kinakailangan

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                  Page 9 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                              PAMANTAYAN
                                     NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                                LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                             PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                              CODE
                               Ang bata ay nagkakaroon   Ang bata ay                                                                             MATERIALS
                               ng pag-unawa sa…          nakapagpapamalas ng...
                                                                                       4.6 pakikinig sa mungkahi ng mga
                                                                                            magulang at iba pang kaanak
                                                                                       4.7 pagpapakita ang interes sa iniisip
                                                                                            at ginagawa ng mga
                                                                                            nakatatanda at iba pang
                                                                                            miyembro ng pamilya
                                                                                  5.   Naikukuwento ang mga ginagawa ng
                                                                                       pamilya nang sama-sama
                                                                                       - Nailalarawan ang nagagawa ng           KMKPPam-00-6
                                                                                          mga tagapag-alaga/Nanay/Tatay/
                                                                                          Lolo/Lola, atbp.
                                                                                  6.   Natutukoy ang mga pangangailangan
                                                                                       ng pamilya at kung paano nila ito        KMKPPam-00-7
                                                                                       natutugunan
                                                                                  7.   Nakahihingi ng tulong sa mga
                                                                                       nakatatanda at iba pang miyembro         KMKPPam-00-8
                                                                                       ng pamilya
Pakikisalamuha sa Iba                                                             1.   Natutukoy na ang bawat isa ay may
Bilang Kasapi ng                                                                       karapatang matuto/makapag-               KMKPAra-00-1
Paaralan (PAra)                                                                        aral/pumasok sa paaralan
                                                                                  2.   Nakikilala ang mga tauhan ng
                                                                                       paaralan at ang tungkulin nilang         KMKPAra-00-2
                                                                                       ginagampanan
                                                                                  3.   Nakapagbubuo ng pagkakaibigan            KMKPAra-00-5
                                                                                  4.   Nakapagkukuwento ng mga
                                                                                       ginagawa sa paaralan                     KMKPAra-00-3

                                                                                  5. Nailalarawan ang mga karanasan na
                                                                                     may kinalaman sa pagtutulungan ng          KMKPAra-00-4
                                                                                     pamilya at paaralan
Pakikisalamuha sa Iba                                                             1. Natutukoy na ang bawat pamilya ay
                                                                                                                                KMKPKom-00-1
Bilang Kasapi ng                                                                     nabibilang sa isang komunidad
Komunidad (PKom)                                                                  2. Natutukoy na ang paaralan ay isang
                                                                                                                                KMKPKom-00-7
                                                                                     mahalagang bahagi ng komunidad
                                                                                  3. Nakikilala ang mga taong
                                                                                     nakatutulong sa komunidad hal.             KMKPKom-00-2
                                                                                     guro, bombero, pulis, at iba pa
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                 Page 10 of 32
                                                         K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                                PAMANTAYAN
                                       NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                               LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                               PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                             CODE
                               Ang bata ay nagkakaroon   Ang bata ay                                                                              MATERIALS
                               ng pag-unawa sa…          nakapagpapamalas ng...
                                                                                      4. Natutukoy ang iba’t ibang lugar sa
                                                                                                                                 KMKPKom-00-3
                                                                                         komunidad
                                                                                      5. Napananatiling malinis ang
                                                                                         kapaligiran sa pamamagitan ng
                                                                                         pagtulong sa mga simpleng gawain
                                                                                                                                 KMKPKom-00-4
                                                                                         tulad ng pagwawalis ng bakuran,
                                                                                         pagtapon ng basura sa tamang
                                                                                         lalagyan at iba pa.
                                                                                      6. Naipakikita ang pagtulong at
                                                                                         pangangalaga sa kapaligiran:
                                                                                         pagdidilig ng mga halaman, pag-aalis    KMKPKom-00-5
                                                                                         ng mga damo at kalat, hindi pagsira
                                                                                         ng halaman, pag-aalaga sa hayop
                                                                                      7. Naikukuwento ang mga naging
                                                                                         karanasan bilang kasapi ng              KMKPKom-00-6
                                                                                         komunidad



B. KAGANDAHANG ASAL (KA)

                                      PAMANTAYAN
                              NILALAMAN         PAGGANAP
   KAUGNAY NA                                                                                                                                     LEARNING
                        Ang bata ay               Ang bata ay                        PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                          CODE
    BATAYAN                                                                                                                                       MATERIALS
                        nagkakaroon ng pag-       nakapagpapamalas ng...
                        unawa sa…

 Pagpapahalaga          konsepto ng mga           tamang pagkilos sa lahat    1. Napagsisikapang matapos ang sinimulang gawain
sa Sarili (PS)          sumusunod na batayan      ng pagkakataon na may          sa itinakdang oras                                KAKPS-00-1
                        upang lubos na            paggalang at                2. Nakagagawa nang may kusa                          KAKPS-00-2
                        mapahalagahan ang         pagsasaalang-alang sa       3. Nakagagawa nang nag-iisa                          KAKPS-00-3
                        sarili:                   sarili at sa iba            4. Naisasagawa ang simpleng gawain nang maluwag
                                                                                 sa kalooban                                       KAKPS-00-4
                        1. Disiplina                                               Nakapagsesipilyo
                                                                              5. Nakasusunod sa mga utos/gawain nang maayos
                                                                                                                                   KAKPS-00-5
                                                                                 at maluwag sa kalooban

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                  Page 11 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                     PAMANTAYAN
                             NILALAMAN          PAGGANAP
   KAUGNAY NA                                                                                                                                        LEARNING
                        Ang bata ay        Ang bata ay                      PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                                     CODE
    BATAYAN                                                                                                                                          MATERIALS
                        nagkakaroon ng pag-      nakapagpapamalas ng...
                        unawa sa…
                                                                           6. Naipakikita nang kaaya-aya ang tamang gawain
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-6
                                                                               sa iba’t ibang sitwasyon
                                                                           7. Naipahahayag sa positibong paraan ang
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-7
                                                                               nararamdaman
                                                                           8. Nakapagliligpit lamang ng sariling gamit              KAKPS-00-9
                                                                           9. Nakasusunod sa mga itinakdang tuntunin at
                                                                                                                                    SEKPSE-IIa-4
                                                                               gawain (routines) sa paaralan at silid-aralan
                                                                           10. Nakapaghihintay ng kanyang pagkakataon               KAKPS-00-12
                        2. Pagkamatapat                                    1. Nakapagsasabi ng totoo sa magulang,
                                                                               nakatatanda at iba pang kasapi ng pamilya sa         KAKPS-00-21
                                                                               lahat ng pagkakataon
                                                                           2. Napagbabalik/napagsasauli ng mga bagay na
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-8
                                                                               napulot
                                                                            3. Nakahihingi ng pahintulot (paggamit ng bagay na
                                                                               pag-aari ng ibang tao, pagpasok/paglabas ng silid-   KAKPS-00-11
                                                                               aralan/tahanan)
                        3. Paggalang                                        1. Natatawag ang mga kalaro at ibang tao sa
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-13
                                                                               kanilang pangalan
                                                                            2. Naipakikita ang pagiging tahimik at maayos sa
                                                                               pagkilos/ pagsunod sa seremonya gaya ng
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-14
                                                                               pagluhod/pagtayo/pagyuko, pag-awit kung nasa
                                                                               pook dalanginan
                                                                            3. Naipakikita ang paggalang sa pambansang
                                                                               sagisag (watawat at Pambansang Awit): pagtayo
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-15
                                                                               nang tuwid na nakalagay ang kanang kamay sa
                                                                               dibdib habang umaawit at itinataas ang watawat
                        4. Pakikipagkapwa                                  1. Naipakikita ang pagpapahalaga sa maayos na
                                                                               pakikipaglaro: pagiging mahinahon, pagsang-ayon
                                                                               sa pasiya ng nakararami/reperi, pagtanggap ng
                                                                                                                                    KAKPS-00-19
                                                                               pagkatalo nang maluwag sa kalooban,
                                                                               pagtanggap ng pagkapanalo nang may kababaang
                                                                               loob
                        5. Pagmamalasakit sa                              1. Nasasabi, nakikilala at naipakikita ang
                           kapwa                                              kahalagahan ng pakikibahagi (pagbabahagi ng           KAKPS-00-16
                                                                              pagkain, laruan, gamit)
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                     Page 12 of 32
                                                         K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                       PAMANTAYAN
                               NILALAMAN          PAGGANAP
   KAUGNAY NA                                                                                                                                        LEARNING
                          Ang bata ay        Ang bata ay                      PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                                    CODE
    BATAYAN                                                                                                                                          MATERIALS
                          nagkakaroon ng pag-      nakapagpapamalas ng...
                          unawa sa…
                                                                                2. Naipakikita ang kusang pagtulong sa panahon ng
                                                                                                                                     KAKPS-00-20
                                                                                   pangangailangan



C. KALUSUGANG PISIKAL AT PAGPAPAUNLAD NG KAKAYAHANG MOTOR (KP)

                                              PAMANTAYAN
                                     NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                                   LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                                         PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                      CODE
                               Ang bata ay nagkakaroon    Ang bata ay                                                                               MATERIALS
                               ng pag-unawa sa…           nakapagpapamalas ng...

Kasanayang Pisikal             kahalagahan ng             sapat na lakas na              1. Nakasasali sa mga laro, o anumang       KPKPF-00-1
(Physical Fitness - PF)        pagkakaroon ng masiglang   magagamit sa pagsali sa           pisikal na gawain at iba’t ibang
                               pangangatawan              mga pang-araw-araw na             paraan ng pag-eehersisyo
                                                          gawain                            - Nakapagsisimula ng laro               SEKPKN-OO-1
                                                                                            - Nakikipaglaro sa dalawa o             SEKPKN-Ig-2
                                                                                                 tatlong bata gamit ang isang
                                                                                                 laruan
                                                                                         2. Nakagagalaw (martsa, palakpak,
                                                                                            tapik, padyak, lakad, lundag at iba
                                                                                            pa) nang angkop sa ritmo at indayog     KPKPF-Ia-2
                                                                                            bilang tugon sa himig na
                                                                                            napapakinggan/awit na kinakanta
Kasanayang                     kanyang kapaligiran at     maayos na galaw at             1. Naisasagawa ang paggalaw/pagkilos
“Gross Motor” (GM)             naiuugnay dito ang         koordinasyon ng mga               ng iba’tibang bahagi ng katawan sa      KPKGM-Ia-1
                               angkop na paggalaw ng      bahagi ng katawan                 saliw ng awitin nang may kasiyahan
                               katawan                                                   2. Naisasagawa ang mga sumusunod
                                                                                            na kilos lokomotor sa pagtugon sa
                                                                                            ritmong mabagal at mabilis              KPKGM-Ie-2
                                                                                            (paglakad, pagtakbo, pagkandirit,
                                                                                            paglundag/pagtalon, paglukso )
                                                                                         3. Nagagamit ang mga kilos lokomotor
                                                                                            at di-lokomotor sa paglalaro, pag-      KPKGM-Ig-3
                                                                                            eehersisyo, pagsasayaw

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                     Page 13 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                              PAMANTAYAN
                                     NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                              LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                             PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                             CODE
                              Ang bata ay nagkakaroon     Ang bata ay                                                                          MATERIALS
                              ng pag-unawa sa…            nakapagpapamalas ng...
                                                                                    4. Naipakikita ang panimbang sa
                                                                                       pagsasagawa ng iba’t ibang kilos ng
                                                                                       katawan, gaya ng paglukso-luksong
                                                                                       pahalinhinan ang mga paa                KPKGM-00-4
                                                                                       (skipping), pagtulay nang di
                                                                                       natutumba sa tuwid na guhit, pag-
                                                                                       akyat at pagbaba sa hagdanan
                                                                                    1. Paggamit ng kutsara at tinidor,
Kasanayang                    sariling kakayahang         kakayahang gamitin ang       pagbobotones, pagsara ng zipper,        KPKFM-00-1
“Fine Motor” (FM)             sumubok gamitin nang        kamay at daliri              pagtali/pagsuot ng sapatos
                              maayos ang kamay upang                                2. Naisasagawa ang mga sumusunod na
                              lumikha/lumimbag                                         kasanayan
                                                                                        2.1 paglipat ng pahina                 KPKFM-00-1.1
                                                                                        2.2 pagtiklop ng papel                 KPKFM-00-1.2
                                                                                        2.3 pagpilas/paggupit/pagdikit ng
                                                                                                                               KPKFM-00-1.3
                                                                                             papel
                                                                                        2.4 pagbakat, pagkopya ng larawan,
                                                                                                                               KPKFM-00-1.4
                                                                                             hugis, at titik
                                                                                        2.5 pagmomolde ng luwad (clay),
                                                                                                                               KPKFM-00-1.5
                                                                                             pagbuo ng puzzles
                                                                                        2.6 paglikha ng mga modelo
                                                                                                                               KPKFM-00-1.6
                                                                                             pangkaraniwang bagay sa paligid
Pangangalaga sa               kakayahang pangalagaan      pagsasagawa ng mga        1. Naisasagawa ang pangangalaga sa
Sariling Kalusugan at         ang sariling kalusugan at   pangunahing kasanayan        pansariling kalusugan tulad ng:
Kaligtasan (PKK)              kaligtasan                  ukol sa pansariling          paglilinis ng katawan, paghuhugas ng
                                                          kalinisan sa pang-araw-      kamay bago at pagkatapos kumain,
                                                          araw na pamumuhay at         pagsesipilyo, pagsusuklay, paglilinis
                                                                                                                               KPKPKK-Ih-1
                                                          pangangalaga para sa         ng kuko, pagpapalit ng damit,
                                                          sariling kaligtasan          pagtugon sa personal na
                                                                                       pangangailangan nang nag-iisa (pag-
                                                                                       ihi, pagdumi) paghuhugas ng kamay,
                                                                                       pagkatapos gumamit ng palikuran
                                                                                    2. Naipakikita ang wastong
                                                                                       pangangalaga sa mga pansariling
                                                                                                                               KPKPKK-00-2
                                                                                       kagamitan sa paglilinis at pag-aayos
                                                                                       ng katawan

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                Page 14 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                              PAMANTAYAN
                                     NILALAMAN           PAGGANAP                                                                           LEARNING
KAUGNAY NA BATAYAN                                                             PALATANDAANG KASANAYAN                           CODE
                              Ang bata ay nagkakaroon   Ang bata ay                                                                         MATERIALS
                              ng pag-unawa sa…          nakapagpapamalas ng...
                                                                                 3. Nakikilala ang kahalagahan ng mga
                                                                                    tuntunin: pag-iwas sa paglalagay ng
                                                                                    maliit na bagay sa bibig, ilong, at
                                                                                    tainga, hindi paglalaro ng posporo,
                                                                                    maingat na paggamit ng
                                                                                    matutulis/matatalim na bagay tulad
                                                                                                                             KPKPKK-Ih-3
                                                                                    ng kutsilyo, tinidor, gunting, maingat
                                                                                    na pag-akyat at pagbaba sa
                                                                                    hagdanan, pagtingin sa kaliwa’t
                                                                                    kanan bago tumawid sa daan,
                                                                                    pananatiling kasama ng nakatatanda
                                                                                    kung nasa sa matataong lugar
                                                                                 4. Nakikilala ang kahalagahan ng
                                                                                    pansariling kaligtasan: nagpapaalam
                                                                                    kung lalabas, sumasama lamang sa
                                                                                                                             KPKPKK-Ih-2
                                                                                    mga kilalang tao/kalaro, nagsasabi
                                                                                    ng “HUWAG” o “HINDI” kung hinipo
                                                                                    ang maselang bahagi ng katawan
                                                                                 5. Naipakikita ang simpleng na
                                                                                    kahandaan sa panahon ng sakuna:          KPKPKK-Ih-4
                                                                                    lindol, baha, sunog, atbp.




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                             Page 15 of 32
                                                             K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
D. SINING

                                           PAMANTAYAN
                                CONTENT            PERFORMANCE
                                                                                                                                                 LEARNING
     DOMAIN             Ang bata ay               Ang bata ay                       LEARNING COMPETENCIES                            CODE
                                                                                                                                                 MATERIALS
                        nagkakaroon ng pag-       nakapagpapamalas ng...
                        unawa sa…
Pagpapahalaga sa        kahalagahan at            kakayahang magmasid      1. Natutukoy ang magagandang bagay na nakikita sa
Kagandahan              kagandahan ng             at magpahalaga sa                                                                SKPK-00-1
                                                                              paligid
(Appreciation)          kapaligiran               ganda ng kapaligiran
                                                                           2. Nabibigyang-pansin ang linya, kulay, hugis at
                                                                              tekstura ng magagandang bagay na:
                                                                               a. makikita sa kapaligiran tulad ng sanga ng
                                                                                   puno, dibuho sa ugat, dahon, kahoy;
                                                                                                                                   SKPK-00-2
                                                                                   bulaklak, halaman, bundok, ulap, bato,
                                                                                   kabibe, at iba pa
                                                                               b. gawa ng tao tulad ng mga sariling gamit,
                                                                                   laruan, bote, sasakyan, gusali
Malikhaing              pagpapahayag ng           kakayahang maipahayag    1. Nakalilikha ng iba’t ibang bagay sa pamamagitan
                                                                                                                                   SKMP-00-1
Pagpapahayag            kaisipan at imahinasyon   ang kaisipan,               ng malayang pagguhit
(Creative               sa malikhain at           damdamin, saloobin at    2. Nakaguguhit, nakapagpipinta at nakapagkukulay
Expression)                                       imahinasyon sa              ng iba’t ibang bagay o gawain (dekorasyon sa
                        malayang pamamaraan
                                                  pamamagitan ng              “name tag”, kasapi ng mag-anak , gawain ng           SKMP-00-2
                                                  malikhaing                  bawat kasapi ng mag-anak, mga alagang hayop
                                                  pagguhit/pagpinta           mga halaman sa paligid)
                                                                           3. Nakagagawa ng modelo ng mga pangkaraniwang
                                                                              bagay sa paligid: dahon, bato, buto, patpat,         SKMP-00-3
                                                                              tansan at iba pa
                                                                           4. Nakagugupit at nakapagdidikit ng iba’t ibang hugis
                                                                                                                                   SKMP-00-4
                                                                              na may iba’t ibang tekstura
                                                                           5. Nakapagkikiskis (rubbing) ng krayola sa papel na
                                                                              nakapatong sa iba’t ibang teksturang makikita sa
                                                                                                                                   SKMP-00-5
                                                                              paligid: semento, banig, medalya, basket, pera,
                                                                              sahig
                                                                           6. Nakapagmomolde ng luwad (clay) sa nais na anyo       SKMP-00-6
                                                                           7. Nakapupunit, nakagugupit at nakapagdidikit sa
                                                                                                                                   SKMP-00-7
                                                                              paggawa ng collage
                                                                           8. Nakapagpapatung-patong, nakapagdudugtung-
                                                                              dugtong at nakapagdidikit-dikit (assemblage) ng      SKMP-00-8
                                                                              mga patapong bagay: maliit na kahon ng gamot
                                                                           9. Nakagagalaw, nakasasabay, nakaiindak at              SKMP-00-9
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                 Page 16 of 32
                                                        K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                      PAMANTAYAN
                              CONTENT          PERFORMANCE
                                                                                                                                                                LEARNING
     DOMAIN             Ang bata ay         Ang bata ay                       LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                                 CODE
                                                                                                                                                                MATERIALS
                        nagkakaroon ng pag-           nakapagpapamalas ng...
                        unawa sa…
                                                                                             nakasasayaw sa himig na napapakinggan
                                                                                         10. Naipakikita ang kawilihan nang may sariling
                                                                                                                                                 SKMP-00-10
                                                                                             interpretasyon sa himig/tugtuging napapakinggan


E. Mathematics (M)

                                                     STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT               PERFORMANCE                                                                                       LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                                     LEARNING COMPETENCIES                        CODE
                              The child demonstrates an        The child shall be able                                                                         MATERIALS
                              understanding of ...             to...
                                                                                                   1. Describe objects based on
Logic (L)                     objects in the environment       manipulate objects based                attributes/properties (shapes, size,     MKSC-00-4
                              have properties or               on properties or attributes             its use and functions)
                              attributes (e.g., color, size,                                       2. Group objects that are alike              MKSC-00-5
                              shapes, and functions)                                               3. Match object, pictures based on
                              and that objects can be                                                  properties /attributes in one-to-one
                              manipulated based on                                                     correspondence
                                                                                                                                                MKAT-00-1
                              these properties and                                                    - object to object
                              attributes                                                              - object to picture
                                                                                                      - picture to picture
                                                                                                   4. Sort and classify objects according
                                                                                                      to one attribute/property (shape,         MKSC-00-6
                                                                                                      color, size, function/use)
                                                                                                   5. Identify sequence of events (before,
                                                                                                                                                MKSC-00-9
                                                                                                      after, first, next, last)
                                                                                                   6. Arrange objects one after another in
                                                                                                      a series/sequence according to a
                                                                                                      given attribute (size, length) and
                                                                                                                                               MKSC-00-10
                                                                                                      describe their relationship
                                                                                                      (big/bigger/biggest or
                                                                                                      long/longer/longest)
                                                                                                   7. Complete patterns                        MKSC-00-19
                                                                                                   8. Reproduce and extend patterns             MKSC-00-20
                                                                                                   9. Create own patterns                       MKSC-00-21

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                                Page 17 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                  LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                   CODE
                              The child demonstrates an      The child shall be able                                                                MATERIALS
                              understanding of ...           to...
                                                                                         10. Transform/translate patterns from
                                                                                                                                     MKSC-00-22
                                                                                              one form to another
                                                                                         11. Tell that the quantity of a set of
                                                                                             objects does not change even
                                                                                             though the arrangement has
                                                                                             changed (i.e., the child should be
                                                                                             able to tell that one set of counters   MKSC-00-23
                                                                                             placed in one-to-one
                                                                                             correspondence and then
                                                                                             rearranged still has the same
                                                                                             quantity)
                                                                                         12. Tell that the volume of liquid does
                                                                                             not change even if the size and         MKSC-00-24
                                                                                             shape of container do
                                                                                         13. Tell that length of an object does
                                                                                                                                     MKSC-00-25
                                                                                             not change even if it is moved
Number and Number             the sense of quantity and      perform simple addition    1. Rote count up to 20                       MKSC-00-12
Sense (NNS)                   numeral relations, that        and subtraction of up to   2. Count objects with one-to-one
                                                                                                                                      MKC-00-7
                              addition results in increase   10 objects or                  correspondence up to quantities of 10
                              and subtraction results in     pictures/drawings          3. Compare two groups of objects to
                              decrease                                                      decide which is more or less, or if
                                                                                            they are equal                            MKC-00-8
                                                                                             Identify sets with one more or
                                                                                                 one less element
                                                                                        4. Recognize and identify numerals
                                                                                                                                      MKC-00-2
                                                                                            0 to 10
                                                                                        5. Read and write numerals 0 to 10            MKC-00-3
                                                                                        6. Match numerals to a set of concrete
                                                                                                                                      MKC-00-4
                                                                                            objects from 0 to 10
                                                                                        7. Identify the number that comes
                                                                                                                                      MKC-00-5
                                                                                            before, after, or in between
                                                                                        8. Arrange three numbers from least to
                                                                                                                                      MKC-00-6
                                                                                            greatest/ greatest to least
                                                                                        9. Identify the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, up to 10th
                                                                                                                                      MKC-00-11
                                                                                            object in a given set
                                                                                        10. Recognize the words “put together,”       MKAT-00-26

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                     Page 18 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                               LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                                MATERIALS
                              understanding of ...        to...
                                                                                        “add to,” and “in all” that indicate the
                                                                                        act of adding whole numbers
                                                                                    11. Recognize the words “take away,”
                                                                                        “less,” and “are left” that indicate the   MKAT-00-4
                                                                                        act of subtracting whole numbers
                                                                                    12. Combine elements of two sets using
                                                                                        concrete objects to represent the          MKAT-00-3
                                                                                        concept of addition
                                                                                    13. Take away a quantity from a given
                                                                                        set using concrete objects to              MKAT-00-4
                                                                                        represent the concept of subtraction
                                                                                    14. Add quantities up to 10 using
                                                                                                                                   MKAT-00-8
                                                                                        concrete objects
                                                                                    15. Subtract quantities up to 10 using
                                                                                                                                   MKAT-00-9
                                                                                        concrete objects
                                                                                    16. Use a variety of materials and
                                                                                        communicate strategies used to
                                                                                                                                   MKAT-00-10
                                                                                        determine answers to addition and
                                                                                        subtraction problems listened to
                                                                                    17. Solve simple addition and subtraction
                                                                                        number stories (up to quantities of
                                                                                        10) read by the teacher using a
                                                                                                                                   MKAT-00-11
                                                                                        variety of ways (e.g., concrete
                                                                                        materials, drawings) and describe
                                                                                        and explain the strategies used
                                                                                    18. Write addition and subtraction
                                                                                        number sentences using concrete            MKAT-00-10
                                                                                        representations
                                                                                    19. Recognize and visualize situations
                                                                                                                                   MKAT-00-14
                                                                                        that require addition and subtraction
                                                                                    20. Group, represent, and count sets of
                                                                                        equal quantity of materials up to 10       MKAT-00-15
                                                                                        (beginning of multiplication)
                                                                                    21. Separate and represent groups of
                                                                                        equal quantities using concrete            MKAT-00-16
                                                                                        objects up to 10 (beginning division)

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                  Page 19 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                               LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                                MATERIALS
                              understanding of ...        to...
                                                                                      22. Divide a whole into two or four equal
                                                                                                                                   MKAT-00-17
                                                                                          parts (halves and fourths)
Measurement (ME)              concepts of size, length,   use arbitrary measuring    1. Tell which activities take a longer or
                              weight, time, and money     tools/means to determine       shorter time (recognize and names
                                                          size, length, weight of        the things that can be done in a
                                                                                                                                  MKME-00-4
                                                          things around him/her,         minute, e.g., washing hands, etc.,
                                                          time (including his/her        and recognize and name the things
                                                          own schedule)                  that can be done in an hour)
                                                                                     2. Recognize that a clock and a watch
                                                                                                                                  MKME-00-5
                                                                                         tell time
                                                                                     3. Recognize and name the hour and
                                                                                                                                  MKME-00-6
                                                                                         minute hands in a clock
                                                                                     4. Tell time by the hour                     MKME-00-7
                                                                                     5. Tell the time of day when activities
                                                                                         are being done, e.g., morning,           MKME-00-3
                                                                                         afternoon, night
                                                                                     6. Tell the number of days in a week         MKC_00-10
                                                                                     7. Tell the names of the days in a week,
                                                                                                                                  MKME-00-8
                                                                                         months in a year
                                                                                     8. Compare objects based on their size,
                                                                                         length, weight/mass
                                                                                            big/little                           MKME-00-2
                                                                                            longer/shorter
                                                                                            heavier/lighter
                                                                                     9. Use nonstandard measuring tools
                                                                                         e.g. length – feet, hand, piece of
                                                                                                string                            MKME-00-1
                                                                                                capacity – mug/glass
                                                                                                mass – stone, table blocks
                                                                                     10. Recognize and identify coins and bills   MKAT-00-2
                                                                                         up to PhP20 (pesos and centavos)
Geometry (G)                  Objects can be 2-           describe and compare 2-    1. Recognize symmetry (own body, basic
                                                                                                                                  MKSC-00-11
                              dimensional or 3-           dimensional and 3-            shapes)
                              dimensional                 dimensional objects        2. Recognize simple shapes in the
                                                                                                                                  MKSC-00-1
                                                                                        environment
                                                                                     3. Identify two to three dimensional         MKSC-00-2
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                  Page 20 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                      LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                        CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                                       MATERIALS
                              understanding of ...        to...
                                                                                              shapes: square, circle, triangle,
                                                                                              rectangle
                                                                                       4.     Identify objects in the environment that
                                                                                              has the same shape as a sphere, cube,      MKSC-00-3
                                                                                              cylinder
                                                                                       5.     Identify the positions of the objects
                                                                                              using "in," "on," "over," "under,"         MKSC-00-12
                                                                                              "top," and "bottom"
Statistics and                organizing and              make sense of available      1.     Collect data on one variable (e.g.,
Probability (SP)              interpreting data           information                         sex/boys or girls) through observation     MKAP-00-1
                                                                                              and asking questions
                                                                                       2.      Create simple pictographs                 MKAP-00-2
                                                                                       3.      Discuss simple pictographs                MKAP-00-3
                                                                                       4.     Tells possible outcomes of familiar
                                                                                              events (e.g., what to wear on a
                                                                                                                                         MKAP-00-5
                                                                                              sunny/rainy days, running fast on a
                                                                                              wet and slippery corridor, etc.)



F. UNDERSTANDING THE PHYSICAL AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENT (PNE)

                                                  STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT            PERFORMANCE                                                                                   LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                               LEARNING COMPETENCIES                         CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                                       MATERIALS
                              understanding of...         to...
Life Science:                                                                               1. Identify one’s basic body parts           PNEKBS-Id-1
Body and the Senses           body parts and their uses   take care of oneself and
                                                                                            2. Tell the function of each basic body
(BS)                                                      the environment and able                                                       PNEKBS-Id-2
                                                                                               part
                                                          to solve problems
                                                                                            3. Demonstrate movements using
                                                          encountered within the                                                         PNEKBS-Ic-3
                                                                                               different body parts
                                                          context of everyday living
                                                                                            4. Name the five senses and their
                                                                                                                                         PNEKBS-Ic-4
                                                                                               corresponding body parts
                                                                                            5. Use the senses to observe the
                                                                                                                                         PNEKBS-Ic-5
                                                                                               environment

K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                         Page 21 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                   LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                    CODE
                              The child demonstrates an    The child shall be able                                                                   MATERIALS
                              understanding of...          to...
                                                                                       6. Use the senses to observe and
                                                                                          perform simple experiments in
                                                                                          classifying objects ( e.g., texture –     PNEKBS-Id-6
                                                                                          soft/hard, smooth/rough; taste –
                                                                                          salty, sweet, sour)
                                                                                       7. Identify one’s basic needs and ways
                                                                                                                                    PNEKBS-Ii-8
                                                                                          to care for one’s body
                                                                                       8. Practice ways to care for one’s body      PNEKBS-Ii-9
                                                                                       9. Describe how one grows and
                                                                                                                                    PNEKBS-Ij-7
                                                                                           changes
Life Science:                 characteristics and needs    communicate the             1. Name common animals                        PNEKA-Ie-1
Animals (A)                   of animals and how they      usefulness of animals and   2. Observe, describe, and examine
                              grow                         practice ways to care for                                                PNEKA-IIIh-2
                                                                                           common animals using their senses
                                                           them                        3. Group animals according to certain
                                                                                            characteristics (how they look/ body,
                                                                                            coverings/parts, how they move,         PNEKA-IIIi-4
                                                                                            sounds they make, what they eat,
                                                                                            where they live)
                                                                                       4. Identify the needs of animals             PNEKA-III g-5
                                                                                       5. Identify ways to care for animals         PNEKA-III g-6
                                                                                       6. Identify and describe how animals
                                                                                                                                    PNEKA-III g-7
                                                                                           can be useful
Life Science:                 characteristics and growth   communicate the             7. Name common plants                        PNEKP-IIa-7
Plants (P)                    of common plants             usefulness of plants and    8. Observe, describe, and examine
                                                                                                                                    PNEKP-IIb-1
                                                           practice ways to care for       common plants using their senses
                                                           them                        9. Group plants according to certain
                                                                                           characteristics, e.g., parts, kind,      PNEKP-IIb-8
                                                                                           habitat
                                                                                       10. Identify needs of plants and ways to
                                                                                           care for plants                          PNEKP-IIb-2
                                                                                       11. Identify and describe how plants can
                                                                                                                                    PNEKP-IIIf-4
                                                                                           be useful




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                      Page 22 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                    LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                      CODE
                              The child demonstrates an    The child shall be able                                                                    MATERIALS
                              understanding of...          to...
Physical Science:             physical properties and      work with objects and        12. Classify objects according to
Properties and Change,        movement of objects          materials safely and             observable properties like size, color,    PNEKPP-00-1
Forces and Motion (PP)                                     appropriately                    shape, texture, and weight)
                                                                                        13. Demonstrate an understanding that
                                                                                            objects are made from one or more
                                                                                                                                       PNEKPP-00-2
                                                                                            materials like metal, plastic, wood,
                                                                                            paper
                                                                                        14. Communicate changes observed
                                                                                            (e.g., shorter pencil when
                                                                                                                                       PNEKPP-00-3
                                                                                            sharpened, ice to water, corn kernel
                                                                                            becomes pop corn)
                                                                                        15. Explores how objects can be moved
                                                                                                                                       PNEKPP-00-4
                                                                                            like pushing, pulling, rising, sinking,
                                                                                            blowing
                                                                                        16. Describe movement of objects like,
                                                                                            straight, round and round, back and        PNEKPP-00-5
                                                                                            forth, fast and slow
                                                                                        17. Use objects and materials safely          PNEKPP-00-6
Earth Science:                different types of weather   talk about how to adapt to   1. Tell and describe the different kinds
Environment and the           and changes that occur in    the different kinds of          of weather (sunny, rainy, cloudy,           PNEKE-00-1
Weather (E)                   the environment              weather and care for the        stormy, windy)
                                                           environment
                                                                                        2. Observe and record the weather
                                                                                                                                       PNEKE-00-1
                                                                                           daily (as part of the opening
                                                                                           routine)
                                                                                        3. Identify what we wear and use for
                                                                                           each kind of weather                        PNEKE-00-2

                                                                                        4. Observe safety practices in different
                                                                                                                                       PNEKE-00-6
                                                                                           kinds of weather
                                                                                        5. Identify simple ways of taking care
                                                                                                                                       PNEKE-00-4
                                                                                           of the environment
                                                                                        6. Explore simple cause-and-effect
                                                                                                                                       PNEKE-00-5
                                                                                           relationships in familiar events and
                                                                                           situations


K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                       Page 23 of 32
                                                                  K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
G. LANGUAGE, LITERACY AND COMMUNICATION (LL)

                                                    STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT              PERFORMANCE                                                                              LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                             LEARNING COMPETENCIES                       CODE
                              The child demonstrates an      The child shall be able                                                                 MATERIALS
                              understanding of...            to...
Auditory                                                                                  1. Identify familiar sounds in the
                                                                                                                                     LLKAPD-Ie-1
Perception and                how to discriminate the        actively listen to the          environment
Discrimination (APD)          different sounds in the        sounds around him/her        2. Tell who/what is producing a given
                                                                                                                                     LLKAPD-Ie-2
                              environment                    and is attentive to make        sound
                                                             judgments and respond        3. Identify where the sound is coming
                                                                                                                                     LLKAPD-Ie-3
                                                             accordingly                     from (inside/outside the room)
                                                                                          4. Tell if the sound is loud/soft,
                                                                                                                                     LLKAPD-Id-4
                                                                                             high/low
                                                                                          5. Differentiate a soft from a loud
                                                                                                                                     LLKAPD-Ie-5
                                                                                             sound/high from low
                                                                                          6. Listen discriminately and respond
                                                                                             appropriately, i.e., speak
                                                                                                                                     LLKAPD-Id-6
                                                                                             loudly/softly when asked, asked to
                                                                                             adjust volume of television/radio
Visual Perception and         similarities and differences   critically observes and      1. Tell which objects/pictures are the
Discrimination                in what he/she can see         makes sense of things           same based on color, shape, size,
                                                                                                                                     LLKVPD-Id-1
(VPD)                                                        around him/her                  direction, and other details (T-shirt
                                                                                             with collar and without collar)
                                                                                          2. Tell the missing parts in objects/
                                                                                                                                     LLKVPD-00-3
                                                                                             pictures
                                                                                          3. Draw the missing part                   LLKVPD-00-5
                                                                                          4. Identify the letter, number, or word
                                                                                                                                     LLKVPD-00-6
                                                                                             that is different in a group
                                                                                          5. Tell which two letters, numbers, or
                                                                                                                                     LLKVPD-Ie-4
                                                                                             words in a group are the same
Oral Language                 increasing his/her             confidently speaks and       1. Use the proper expression in
(OL)                          conversation skills            expresses his/her feelings      introducing oneself                     LLKVPD-Ia-13
                                                             and ideas in words that          e.g., I am/My name is ______




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                      Page 24 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                  CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                                 MATERIALS
                              understanding of...         to...
                                                          make sense                   2. Use polite greetings and courteous
                                                                                          expressions in appropriate situations
                                                                                          1.1 Good Morning/Afternoon
                                                                                                                                   LLKOL-Ia-1
                                                                                          1.2 Thank You/You’re Welcome
                                                                                          1.3 Excuse Me/I’m Sorry
                                                                                          1.4 Please…./May I…..
                                                                                       3. Recite rhymes and poems, and sing
                                                                                          simple jingles/songs in the mother       LLKOL-Ia-2
                                                                                          tongue, Filipino and/or English
                                                                                       4. Talk about one’s personal
                                                                                          experiences/narrates events of the       LLKOL-Ig-3
                                                                                          day
                                                                                       5. Talk about likes/dislikes (foods,
                                                                                                                                   LLKOL-Ic-15
                                                                                          pets, toys, games, friends, places)
                                                                                       6. Talk about the details of an
                                                                                          object/picture like toys, pets, foods,   LLKOL-Id-4
                                                                                          places
                                                                                       7. Talk about family members, pets,
                                                                                          toys, foods, or members of the
                                                                                                                                   LLKOL-00-5
                                                                                          community using various
                                                                                          appropriate descriptive words
                                                                                       8. Ask questions about stories (who,
                                                                                          what, where, when, why) as may be        LLKOL-00-7
                                                                                          appropriate
                                                                                       9. Give 1- to 2-step oral directions        LLKOL-00-8
                                                                                       10. Express thoughts, feelings, fears,
                                                                                                                                   LLKOL-Ig-9
                                                                                           ideas, wishes, and dreams
                                                                                       11. Participate actively in a dialog or
                                                                                                                                   LLKOL-00-10
                                                                                           conversation of familar topics
                                                                                       12. Retell in 1 to 3 sentences through
                                                                                                                                   LLKOL-Ih-12
                                                                                           pictures and dramatization
Phonological                  letter sound to name        identify/pick out the        1. Identify the sounds of letters orally
Awareness (PA)                relations                   distinct sounds in words,        given                                   LLKPA-Ig-1
                                                          match sounds with letters,   2. Identify whether or not 2 spoken
                                                          and hear specific letter                                                 LLKPA-Ic-2
                                                                                          words begin with the same sound
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                   Page 25 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                               LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                 CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                                MATERIALS
                              understanding of...         to...
                                                          sound by listening to         3. Select from 3 spoken words those
                                                                                                                                  LLKPA-00-3
                                                          familiar poems and stories,      that begin with the same sound
                                                          and singing of rhymes and     4. Tell whether a pair or set of spoken
                                                                                                                                  LLKPA-Ic-4
                                                          songs                            words rhyme
                                                                                        5. Tell whether words from a story
                                                                                           read rhyme or not                      LLKPA-00-9

                                                                                        6. Give a word that rhymes with a
                                                                                                                                  LLKPA-00-6
                                                                                           spoken word
                                                                                        7. Identify several words that begin
                                                                                           with the same sound as the spoken      LLKPA-Ig-7
                                                                                           word
                                                                                        8. Tell the number of syllables in
                                                                                                                                  LLKPA-Ig-8
                                                                                           given spoken words
Book and Print                book familiarity,           Use book – handle and         1. Identify parts of a book (front and
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-2
Awareness (BPA)               awareness that there is a   turn the pages; take care        back cover, and its pages)
                              story to read with a        of books, enjoy listening
                                                                                        2. Identify/read the title of the story   LLKBPA-00-3
                              beginning and an end,       to stories repeatedly and
                              written by author(s) and    may play pretend-reading,     3. Talk about the pictures on the book
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-4
                              illustrated by someone      and associates                   cover
                                                          him/herself with the story    4. Tell what an author and illustrator
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-5
                                                                                           do
                                                                                        5. Predict what the story is all about
                                                                                           based on the title of the book and     LLKBPA-00-9
                                                                                           the picture on the cover
                                                                                        6. Flip pages of the book sequentially
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-6
                                                                                           from front to back
                                                                                        7. Tell that the left page is looked
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-7
                                                                                           at/read before the right page
                                                                                        8. Point to the first part/beginning of
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-8
                                                                                           story
Alphabet Knowledge            letter representation of    identify the letter names     1. Recognize one’s given name by
                                                                                                                                  LLKAK-Ia-6
(AK)                          sounds – that letters as    and sounds                       sight
                              symbols have names and                                    2. Identify the letters of one’s given
                                                                                                                                  LLKAK-Ic-1
                              distinct sounds                                              name
                                                                                        3. Identify the letters of the alphabet
                                                                                                                                  LLKAK-Ih-3
                                                                                           (mother tongue, orthography)
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                  Page 26 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                             LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                               CODE
                              The child demonstrates an   The child shall be able                                                              MATERIALS
                              understanding of...         to...
                                                                                    4. Give the sound of each letter
                                                                                                                                 LLKAK-Ih-7
                                                                                        (mother tongue, orthography)
                                                                                    5. Match the letter sound to its letter
                                                                                                                                 LLKAK-Ih-5
                                                                                        form
                                                                                    6. Name the beginning letters of their
                                                                                        friends' names, their family
                                                                                                                                 LLKAK-Ic-2
                                                                                        members’, and common things they
                                                                                        use
                                                                                    7. Match an upper- to its lower-case
                                                                                                                                 LLKAK-Ih-4
                                                                                        letter
                                                                                    8. Trace, copy, and write different
                                                                                        strokes: scribbling (free
                                                                                        hand), straight lines, slanting lines,
                                                                                        combination of straight and              LLKH-00-6
                                                                                        slanting lines, curves,
                                                                                        combination of straight and curved
                                                                                        and zigzag
                                                                                    9. Trace, copy, and draw familiar
                                                                                                                                 LLKH-00-2
                                                                                        figures
                                                                                    10. Trace, copy, and write the letters of
                                                                                        the alphabet: straight lines
                                                                                        (A,E,F,H,I L,T), combination of
                                                                                        straight and slanting lines (K, M,N,
                                                                                                                                 LLKH-00-3
                                                                                        V, W, X, Y, Z), combination of
                                                                                        straight and curved lines (B, C, D,
                                                                                        G, J, O, P, Q, R, S, U), rounded
                                                                                        strokes with loops
                                                                                    11. Write one’s given name                   LLKH-00-5
                                                                                    12. Write the lower case for each upper-
                                                                                                                                 LLKH-00-4
                                                                                        case letter or vice versa
Study Skills (SS)             the importance in getting   note details from the     1. Answer questions about the details
                                                                                                                                 LLKSS-00-1
                              details from the            environment and               in a pictograph
                              environment                 information presented     2. Name the places and the things
                                                                                                                                 LLKSS-00-2
                                                                                        found in a map of a classroom
                                                                                    3. Get information from simple
                                                                                                                                 LLKSS-00-3
                                                                                        environmental prints
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                Page 27 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                 CODE
                              The child demonstrates an     The child shall be able                                                               MATERIALS
                              understanding of...           to...
Composing (C)                 different symbols in          express simple ideas         1. Express simple ideas through
                              representing ideas            through symbols                 symbols (e.g., drawings, invented      LLKC-00-1
                                                                                            spelling)
Attitude Towards              importance that books can     demonstrate positive         1. Listen attentively and react during
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-9
Reading (ATR)                 be used to entertain self     attitude toward reading by      story reading
                              and to learn new things       himself/herself and with     2. Hold the book upright                 LLKBPA-00-1
                                                            others
                                                                                         3. Browse books on their own             LLKBPA-00-10
                                                                                         4. Initiate reading books with
                                                                                                                                  LLKBPA-00-11
                                                                                            peer/teacher
Vocabulary                    acquiring new words/          actively engage in           1. Name common objects/things in
Development (V)               widening his/her              meaningful conversation         the environment (in school,            LLKV-00-1
                              vocabulary links to his/her   with peers and adults           home, and community)
                              experiences                   using varied spoken
                                                                                         2. Describe common objects/things
                                                            vocabulary
                                                                                            in the environment based on
                                                                                             color, shape, size, and               LLKV-00-2
                                                                                            function/use
                                                                                         3. Recall and use words from story
                                                                                                                                   LLKV-00-3
                                                                                            listened to
                                                                                         4. Give the meaning of words
                                                                                            presented through real objects,
                                                                                                                                   LLKV-00-4
                                                                                            pictures, actions, synonyms and
                                                                                            antonyms, and context clues
                                                                                         5. Name objects that begin with a
                                                                                                                                   LLKV-00-5
                                                                                            particular letter of the alphabet
                                                                                         6. Give the names of family
                                                                                            members, school personnel, and
                                                                                            community helpers, and the             LLKV-00-6
                                                                                            roles they play/ jobs they
                                                                                            do/things they use
                                                                                         7. Name the places and the things
                                                                                            found in the classroom, school         LLKV-00-8
                                                                                            and community
                                                                                         8. Give the synonyms and
                                                                                                                                   LLKV-00-7
                                                                                            antonyms of given words


K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                   Page 28 of 32
                                                       K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                               STANDARDS
                                       CONTENT         PERFORMANCE                                                                                 LEARNING
     SUB-DOMAIN                                                                LEARNING COMPETENCIES                                   CODE
                              The child demonstrates an     The child shall be able                                                                MATERIALS
                              understanding of...           to...
Listening                     information received by       listen attentively and    1. Listen attentively to stories/poems/
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-1
Comprehension                 listening to stories and be   respond/interact with         songs
(LC)                          able to relate within the     peers and teacher/adult   2. Recall details of the story:
                              context of their own          appropriately                 characters, when and where the
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-2
                              experience                                                  stories/poems/songs happened, and
                                                                                          the events in story listened to
                                                                                      3. Talk about the characters and
                                                                                          events in short stories/poems             LLKLC-Ih-3
                                                                                          listened to
                                                                                      4. Relate personal experiences to
                                                                                          events in stories/poems/songs             LLKLC-Ig-4
                                                                                          listened to
                                                                                      5. Retell stories listened to, with the
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-5
                                                                                          help of pictures
                                                                                      6. Tell the event that happened first,
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-Ih-6
                                                                                          middle, and last in stories listened to
                                                                                      7. Give the correct sequence of three
                                                                                          events in a story listened to orally      LLKLC-00-7
                                                                                          and/or through drawing
                                                                                      8. Infer character feelings and traits in
                                                                                          a story listened to
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-Ig-8
                                                                                      9. Identify the speaker in the story or
                                                                                          poem listened to
                                                                                      10. Identify simple cause and/or effect
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-9
                                                                                          of events in a story listened to
                                                                                      11. Identify problem solutions in a story
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-11
                                                                                          listened to
                                                                                      12. Predict what might happen next in
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-10
                                                                                          the story listened to
                                                                                      13. Predict possible ending of a story
                                                                                                                                    LLKLC-00-12
                                                                                          listened to
                                                                                      14. Express one’s idea/self freely
                                                                                          through creative ways (drawing,
                                                                                          illustration, body movement,              LLKLC-00-13
                                                                                          singing, dancing) based on story
                                                                                          listened to
K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                    Page 29 of 32
                                                            K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM

                                                                        CODE BOOK LEGEND

                                                                        Sample: MKC-00-8


                                                 LEGEND                                                                           SAMPLE


                                                          Learning Area and Strand/ Subject or
                                                                                                                  Mathematics
                                                                     Specialization
                        First Entry                                                                                                              MK

                                                                      Grade Level                                 Kindergarten


                                                                   Domain/Content/
                   Uppercase Letter/s
                                                                   Component/ Topic
                                                                                                                    Counting                      C

                                                                                                                                                   -
                     Roman Numeral
                *Zero if no specific quarter
                                                                        Quarter                               No Specific Quarter                 0

                   Lowercase Letter/s
              * Zero if no specific quarter
     *Put a hyphen (-) in between letters to indicate                    Week                                  No Specific Week                   0
               more than a specific week.

                                                                                                                                                   -


                                                                                                 Compare two groups of objects to decide
                     Arabic Number                                    Competency
                                                                                                 which is more or less, or if they are equal
                                                                                                                                                  8




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                 Page 30 of 32
                                                               K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM
                                                                         CODE BOOK LEGEND
            DOMAIN/ SUB-DOMAIN/ COMPONENT                                CODE               DOMAIN/ SUB-DOMAIN/ COMPONENT                     CODE
   Pagpapaunlad sa Kakayahang Sosyo-Emosyunal                              SE            Mathematics                                           M
         Pagkilala ng Sarili at Pagpapahayag ng Sariling Emosyon          PSE                 Sorting and Classifying                          SC
         Pag-unawa sa Emosyon ng Iba                                       EI                 Counting                                          C
         Pakikipag-ugnayan sa Kapwa at Nakatatanda                        PKN                 Number and Algebraic Thinking                    AT
            Pagpapahalaga sa Pagkakaiba                                   PP                    Measurement                                     ME
      Pagpapaunlad sa Kakayahang Makipamuhay                              KM                    Data Analysis and Probability                   AP
            Pakikisalamuha sa iba bilang kasapi ng pamilya               PPam            Understand Physical and Natural Environment           PNE
            Pakikisalamuha sa iba bilang kasapi ng paaralan              PAra                  Life Science: Body and Senses                    BS
                                                                                               Physical Science: Properties and Change,
            Pakikisalamuha sa iba bilang kasapi ng komunidad             PKom                                                                   PP
                                                                                               Forces and Motion
   Kagandahang Asal                                                       KA                   Life Science: Animals                            A
            Pagpapahalaga sa Sarili                                       PS                    Life Science: Plants                            P
   Kalusugang Pisikal at Pagpapaunlad ng Kakayahang Motor                 KP                   Earth Science: Environment and the Weather       E
         Kasanayang Pisikal/Physical Fitness                              PF             Language, Literacy and Communication                   LL
         Kasanayang Gross Motor                                           GM                   Auditory Perception and Discrimination          APD
            Kasanayang Fine Motor                                         FM                    Visual Perception and Discrimination           VPD
            Pangangalaga sa Sariling Kalusugan at Kaligtasan              PKK                   Oral Language                                  OL
   Sining                                                                                       Phonological Awareness                         PA
            Pagpapahalaga sa kagandahan                                                         Book and Print Awareness                       BPA
            Malikhaing Pagpapahayag                                                             Alphabet Knowledge                              AK
                                                                                                Study Skills                                    SS
                                                                                                Composing                                       C
                                                                                                Attitude Toward Reading                        ATR
                                                                                                Vocabulary Development                          V
                                                                                                Listening Comprehension                         LC
                                                                                                Study Skilss                                    SS
                                                                                                Composing                                       C




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                              Page 31 of 32
                                                              K to 12 BASIC EDUCATION CURRICULUM


References:

Bureau of Elementary Education, 2002. Grade One Curriculum. Revised Basic Education Curriculum, Department of Education, Pasig City, Philippines

Bureau of Elementary Education, 2003. Preschool Education Handbook for Teachers, Revised Edition, Department of Education, Pasig City, Philippines

Bureau of Elementary Education, 2009. Standards and Competencies for Five-Year Old Filipino Children, Department of Education, Pasig City, Philippines

Bureau of Elementary Education, 2011. Standards and Competencies for Five-Year Old Filipino Children, Department of Education, Pasig City,

Copple, Carol and Bredecamp, Sue, eds. Developmentally Appropriate Practices in Early Childhood Program : Serving Children from Birth through age Eight., USA: National
        Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), 2012.

Early Childhood Care and Development Council (ECCD Council), 2011. National Early Learning Framework of the Philippines, Pasig City,Philippines
        Jersey: Peason Ed. Inc. 2011.

Marjorie J. Kostelnik, Anne K. Soderman, and Alice Phipps Whiren. Developmentally Appropriate Curriculum: Best Practices in Early Childhood Education, 5th Ed. New

R. A. 8980. The Early Childhood Care and Development Act

Senate Bill 2700. The Kindergarten Act.




K to 12 Kindergarten Curriculum Guide May 2016                                                                                                            Page 32 of 32
